# oe-corpus-tools

Processing tools for various Old English text corpora and resources. I'm still organizing the folder structure.

## Disclaimer

The tools here provided have been developed and made available with no affiliation to any of the projects whose resources they evaluate. They merely provide users who have acquired these resources with ways to process data already lawfully in their possession.

## Attested Spellings

`attsp.sh` is a primitive `bash` script that, if run from a folder with a subfolder `doe/` containing the entries of the 2017 _DOE A–H_ CD-ROM release in HTML format, will extract and store (1) the lemma, (2) the line reporting on the number of attestations, and (3) each attested spelling on its own line in a corresponding plaintext file for convenient `grep` access.

`jsonify.py` is a Python script that takes the resulting data and stores them in two JSON files: one (`attsp.json`) organized by headword and another (`attsp_inverted.json`) by spelling for ease of programmatic access.

## Part-of-Speech Labels

`ycoe_pos.py` extracts simplified POS labels for each form attested in YCOE (assumed to reside in a subfolder `ycoe/`), outputting two JSON files: one with multiple labels, ranked for frequency, where applicable, and one with just the top-ranking label, merged with the second-ranking label if a certain distribution criterion is met.

## XSLT Transformation Stylesheets

The folder `stylesheets/` currently contains a single, very basic XSLT stylesheet for transforming DOEC to plaintext, as a way of giving non-experts something to work with.

## Research Data

The folder `research_data/` is reserved for scripts generating data referenced in my published research. At the moment, it contains the following project:

### _Hebban olla uogala_

The scripts in the subfolder `uogala/` facilitate the reproducibility of work reported in my article "The Case Against English Elements in _Hebban olla uogala_" (forthcoming in _Amsterdamer Beiträge zur älteren Germanistik_):

- __`h-prothesis.py`__: If placed in a folder whose grandparent folder contains (1) `attsp.json` as generated by the abovementioned scripts as well as (2) a folder `doec-plaintext/` containing a plaintext transformation of DOEC (or any other corpus of Old English) that has been stripped of all `<foreign>` content, this script will output (1) a plaintext file `h-prothesis.txt` listing all headwords beginning in _a_ or _ā_ that have attested spellings starting in _h_, each with a list of such forms; and (2) a plaintext file `h-prothesis-doec.txt` returning all occurrences of these spellings in the corpus provided.

- __`levelling.py`__: this script has a few dependencies I'm still working on integrating into this repository, and the script itself is not final, stay tuned. But it serves to extract common nouns ending in "es" or "as" in a format for convenient manual classification.

## License Notice

`oe-corpus-tools` is Copyright 2025 P. S. Langeslag.

`oe-corpus-tools` is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or (at your option) any later version.

`oe-corpus-tools` is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. See the GNU General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along with `oe-corpus-tools`. If not, see <https://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
